Yogi: Mother you said in Caxton Hall that
if a person doesn’t speak to their mother
for a long time…can you elaborate
on that theme again please.
Shri Mataji: You see, you are born from a mother, alright?
You are not born hanging from a tree,
and neither you are thrown from the heavens
and suddenly you are found, born on this Earth.
You are born from a mother in her womb.
Her blood flows into you for nine months.
You live upon her.
You are a part and parcel of her being for nine months,
which is the most important time of your life.
Now, she is there to give you, first, the sense of security.
In a mother’s womb a child feels secured.
If the mother is upset it has an effect on the child.
If there’s something wrong with
her then that is affected on the child,
in the sense, physically, also.
It’s such a deep relationship exists between you and your mother
that I’ll have to write a book to tell you how much it is deep within you.
But, within us, the power of Kundalini is the power of a Mother and not of a Father.
The Father is the Witness as a Spirit and the Mother is the Kundalini,
and the Kundalini has to rise.
Now it is the Mother in you that is the Kundalini and your own mother.
It very much depends what kind of relationship you have with your own mother.
Supposing you do not know how to love your own mother,
you can never love your mother country, you can never love it.
That is the beginning. The training starts there only, with your mother.
If that point is lacking then you cannot have a full blooming of that love.
Now maybe the mother has not been a very good mother possibly.
There are according to Sanskrit words, as I told you,
there cannot be a bad mother – kumata –
but sometimes she could be bad also.
So the idea of a ‘bad mother’ is more brought forth by
the intervention of law into mother child relationship.
When the mother is being punished by law
for correcting her child or doing something,
the artificiality starts; when people can sue their mothers.
The responsibility of the law is not to disturb the natural relationships.
If they start disturbing the natural relationship the artificiality starts.
And that’s why, in the countries where law has taken charge of children and such things,
without understanding the basic thing that it is a natural thing to love your child.
Instead of that, if they had encouraged mothers
who were more loving, more kind, if they had even training to mothers,
how to be more kind and gentle,
if they had given more impetus to people to be good mothers.
Instead of having beauty contests if they had ‘good mother contests’.
If motherhood had been upheld by political and economic institutions,
then it would have been much better.
But the whole society is turning to self-destruction,
so the law, first, takes over.
So the child is quite sure of itself.
Now an eighteen year old boy in the family,
who gets the dole (unemployment payments),
then he thinks no end of himself.
He answers back his mother;
he talks in a very rude manner to the mother.
It’s alright to say you have done it for an eighteen year old boy
but you don’t know that [maybe] he is the eldest boy;
the other children in the family follow him up.
So they pick it up when they are even very young.
The idea of giving money to boys at that age also is extremely harmful
because when he gets the money the other
children think they must also get some money,
so they start charging mother for the work that they are doing
– you must pay 5p for bringing a glass of water for the mother.
Then the mothers now are of a different type.
I mean, there are so many mothers who say that,
“It is not a thing that we should love our children; it’s not natural”!
Artificial has become natural and natural has become artificial.
How is it, within these [last] ten or fifteen years,
suddenly the mothers have become so funny?
Now, because of these pressures, what happens
is that we develop a feeling against our mother.
We start judging our mother and father.
We should never judge them.
We are not to judge them because we have chosen them.
They are there just as part and parcel of ourselves.
Supposing your nose is broken:
Do you start judging yourself,
“My nose is broken, my nose is broken”?
Do you discard your nose?
In the same way your parents are.
You cannot discard your parents!
But the whole society is working like this.
It’s a vicious circle.
Now, if I say, “You go and talk to your mother,”
then you can say,
“My mother is not a good person. She is this and that.”
Then I have to say, “Alright, then you forgive her.”
Then you don’t like it.
You would expect me to tell you,
“Alright, just go and bash her.”
You would be pleased if I tell you like that,
some of you would
– “Go and beat her up!” But I would not say like that
because that’s not the way
Sahaja Yogis are going to work away.
You must know that the whole society
is in a whirlwind, it’s a whirlwind,
so somebody has to steady oneself
and stop and try to change the winds.
And that’s why a Sahaja Yogi has to stand up
and understand that respect and reverence of parents is important.
But it is an actual thing, because if you are
not good with your mother your left side is weak;
you have seen it on the vibrations. Whatever I say
you can see it on your vibrations. You will be the loser.
So forgive her. Know that she has given you birth.
Maybe if she has been harsh to you,
angry with you or done something
– forgive her. And you will be amazed, you can win her over,
it’s not difficult because by your goodness to her,
by your over-goodness towards her, relatively, it will work.
And maybe, exceptionally, one person may be this thing (kumata)
but you cannot make a rule out of that;
exceptionally one may be.
But if you have to change the society,
the whole thinking, somebody has to stand up.
And it is a chakra within you, you know,
where it touches a point of Void,
where the left-side touches the point of Void.
That is a centre, a very important centre
for a mother, which [it] makes.
And do you know it is very near the centre of existence,
because your existence depends on that.
Supposing a child had no mother:
he can never be a good husband,
very difficult for him to be a good husband
because all the womanhood,
all the kindness, the sublimity, the greatness of women,
is known through your mother to begin with;
or a woman who does not have a
mother, can never be a good wife
or could not be a good mother herself.
All these things are there so we have to stop it and change it.
This is the point. Sahaja Yogis must know
that we have to change and transform ourselves
and that is the point [where] they feel bad.
We are not only responsible for our change but
we have to bring about the change in the whole world,
where the society is getting destroyed,
the human beings are getting destroyed,
so we have to stand up.
So we have to change our way of thinking.
What’s wrong in talking to your mother?
She’s not going to kill you if you talk to her.
Why don’t you talk to her? Because you hate her,
you want her to feel bad.
I mean, you don’t go and hit your mother.
This is the only way you can really be harsh
to her, is not to talk to her
– [so] she feels rejected by her own child
whom she has created.
God must be feeling that way also the way we reject Him.
Everybody’s left side improves now.
But try to love and you will enjoy,
because loving is the greatest thing.
To love someone is adoration,
absolute adoration, is reverence.
If you love someone then you know that
it is so great, it makes you so great to love someone.
It’s a very great feeling that, “I love someone”;
it’s like a Lord one feels,
“Oh I love this one and I love so many
and so many are there!”
And that person need not love me,
I mean I don’t think all the Sahaja Yogis
love me so much as I love them, maybe.
But I’m very proud of my Sahaja Yogis and I love them.
This is the most joy-giving thing is to love, yourself.
To be able to love, that’s the greatest ability
a person should have – is to love others.
And in love, forgiveness is the most; that’s why
Christ said forgiveness is the greatest weapon.
And what do you achieve by not talking?
I mean, what do you achieve?
Let us see the other side of it; what do we
achieve by not talking to someone?
Rationally. It’s a sweet method of course, if sometimes
children do, “I am not talking to you,” you see.
Then you can have a little play about that.
But it should be just a play.
If it is a serious stuff it’s nonsense.
It’s just to play about, is very good that,
“I’m not talking to you,
I’m not going to talk to you for some time,” he knows that.
But then it is not serious, it is just to bring out certain points
and it’s nice that mother should come and cuddle you
and persuade you and try to help you
– that’s a good thing. But the way we are serious
about it is something wrong.